# Laying the Foundation

Before we get into implementation details let's build up some foundations, considering a few (mostly) straightforward use-cases. Suppose that we've been hired by a bank to build an application that will track accounts and balances. These are the functional requirements we've been handed:

1. Our first iteration must support opening accounts, depositing funds, withdrawing funds, and transfering funds between accounts,
1. Accounts are identified by the customer's first name and, for now, are guaranteed to be unique. Accounts have a balance, and the balance is always an integer
1. Power loss is frequent so we must be able to handle intermittent failures gracefully. Data should be retainted across startups/shutdowns, even if they're unexpected.


## The Banking Interface

Let's first design an interface for a `Bank` class that we can use as an entrypoint for the banking operations we've been asked to supprt:

```ruby
class Bank
  def open_account(account_name)
    raise NotImplementedError
  end

  def inquire(account_name)
    raise NotImplementedError
  end

  def deposit(account_name, amount)
    raise NotImplementedError
  end

  def withdraw(account_name, amount)
    raise NotImplementedError
  end

  def transfer(src_account_name, dest_account_name, amount)
    raise NotImplementedError
  end
end
```

It's not particularly useful yet. We'll need some way to store information we capture via these operations. Since account identifiers are guaranteed to be unique and there's only a single piece of information (the balance) to track per account a hash seems like a reasonable choice:

```ruby
class Buffer
  def initialize()
    @data = {}
  end

  def create(key)
    @data[key] ||= 0
  end

  def read(key)
    @data[key]
  end

  def update(key, value)
    @data[key] = value if @data[key]
  end
  
  def delete(key)
    raise NotImplementedError
  end
  
  def peek
    @data
  end
end
```

I've chosen to wrap a hash in a class called `Buffer`[^1]. Wrapping the underlying data structure in a class lets us encapsulate the implementation details and expose a **c**reate, **r**ead, **u**pdate, **d**elete (CRUD) interface.  Now we can use the `Buffer`'s CRUD interface to power the banking operations we outlined earlier:

[^1]: The reason for the name will become clear soon!

```ruby
require_relative "buffer"

class Bank
  def initialize
    @buffer = Buffer.new
  end

  def open_account(account_name)
    @buffer.create(account_name)
  end

  def inquire(account_name)
    @buffer.read(account_name)
  end

  def deposit(account_name, amount)
    balance = inquire(account_name)
    new_balance = balance + amount
    @buffer.update(account_name, new_balance)
  end

  def withdraw(account_name, amount)
    balance = inquire(account_name)
    new_balance = balance - amount
    @buffer.update(account_name, new_balance)
  end

  def transfer(src_account_name, dest_account_name, amount)
    raise NotImplementedError
  end

  def peek
    @buffer.peek
  end
end

```

We have a `Bank` class that supports almost all of our known banking operations, storing accounts and balances:

```irb
[output]examples/1-1-success.rb@1.1
```

However, as you can probably guess, our last use-case is blatantly failing:

```irb
[output]examples/1-1-failure.rb@1.1
```

## Loading Persisted Data

Our issue is that we're relying on memory that's only avaialble to our program while isn't running. Put another way, it's not durable storage. After our progam exists, the operating system will reclaim the memory and potentially let another program overwrite it.  To fix this we add a step to our banking operations that will make sure changes are saved to durable storage before returning.

Starting simply, let's demonstrate that, given a saved file with account and balances, we can load the saved state when our bank is initialized. We'll write a `Disk`[^2] class to encapsulate the transferring of saved data from durable storage to our in-memory `Buffer`:

```ruby
class Disk
  FILENAME = "data.txt"
  
  def initialize
    File.open(FILENAME, "a") {}
  end

  def load(buffer)
    file = File.open(FILENAME, "r")
    file.each_line do |line|
      key, value = line.chomp.split(":")
      buffer[key] = value.to_i
    end
    file.close
  end
end
```

When we initialize the `Data` class we make sure that our underlying file exists[^3]. The `#load` method will read from the file and populate a hash[^4] passed to it.

[^3]: A more traditional way to do this might be to check for the file's existence, creating it if necessary. This one-liner takes advantage of the fact that opening a file in **a**ppend mode will create it if it doesn't exist, and won't truncate the content of the file. Passing a block closes the file automatically.

[^4]: In a typical RDBMS a *buffer* is simply an array of bytes and is passed to a disk manager (similar to our `Disk` class) to be populated with some data in durable storage. For this reason I've named `#load`'s parameter `buffer`, even though it's not an instance of `Buffer`. From `Disk`'s perspective, it's receiving a variable that ought to be populated with data from storage and that, in the RDBMS domain, is a *buffer*.

If we provide an instance of `Disk` to a `Buffer` at initialization it can pass it's underlying hash to `Disk#load` - providing it the state of the bank that existed before the program began:

```ruby
class Buffer
  def initialize(disk)
    @data = {}
    disk.load(@data)
  end

  # ...

end
```

Finally, `Bank` can arrange for `Buffer` to receive a `Disk` instance:

```ruby
require_relative "buffer"
require_relative "disk"

class Bank
  def initialize
    @disk = Disk.new
    @buffer = Buffer.new(@disk)
  end

  # ...
end
```

The data encoding format that this implementation supports is simply plaintext key/value pairs.  This example shows that, given a file of account/balance pairs, our bank can load previously stored data:

```irb
[output]examples/1-2.rb@1.2
```

## Writing Persisted Data

We've solved half our our persistence problem. Now we need to make sure that when changes are made via our supported banking operations, those changes are written to durable storage.  That should round out our compliance with our remaining use-case.

First, let's update the API of our `Disk` class to not only read, but write to durable storage:

```ruby
class Disk
  
  # ...

  def dump(buffer)
    File.open(FILENAME, "w") do |file|
      buffer.each do |key, value|
        file.puts "#{key}:#{value}"
      end
    end
  end
end
```

Nothing too surprising there. Now, I'm going to call this method in a sort of round-a-bout way.  Instead of modifying operations in `Bank` to simply `@disk.dump(@buffer)`, I'm going to try to hide the details of persistence from the `Bank` class. At the same time, I'm going to keep our options open for *how* and *when* we write data to durable storage by implementing a persistence *strategy* that we can change later on.

First, the `Immediate` persistence strategy:

```ruby
module Persistence
  class Immediate
    def initialize(disk)
      @disk = disk
    end

    def persist(buffer)
      @disk.dump(buffer)
    end
  end
end
```

It's pretty boring! It has an extremely simple API, `#persist`, which just...dumps the buffer to durable storage. It may be unimpressive but it lives up to it's name - it *immediately* persists data![^5].

[^5]: Perhaps later we'll find some use-cases where we don't want to immediately persist data.  Time will tell!

Some ceremony is required since this class exists in a module namespace. By defining the module itself we can simply `require_relative "persistence"` and not have to burden ourselves with exactly which persistence strategy we want:

```ruby
require_relative "persistence/immediate"

module Persistence; end
```

As far as actually calling the `#persist` method, I'll have the `Buffer` class handle that. I've chosen to use a Ruby block to add in some after-operation behavior, keeping our applicable CRUD methods simple:

```ruby
class Buffer
  def initialize(disk, persistence_strategy)
    @data = {}
    disk.load(@data)
    @persistence = persistence_strategy.new(disk)
  end

  def create(key)
    modify do
      @data[key] ||= 0
    end
  end

  def read(key)
    @data[key]
  end

  def update(key, value)
    modify do
      @data[key] = value if @data[key]
    end
  end
  
  def delete(key)
    raise NotImplementedError
  end

  def peek
    @data
  end

  private

  def modify
    yield if block_given?
    @persistence.persist(@data)
  end
end

```

`Buffer` will handle initializing the strategy (injecting `@disk` as a dependency) and keep a handle on the stragegy instance with the `@persistence` instance variable.

This leaves the `Bank` class to simply pass the persistence strategy to `Buffer` and let the magic happen:

```ruby
#...

require_relative "persistence"

class Bank
  def initialize
    @disk = Disk.new
    @buffer = Buffer.new(@disk, Persistence::Immediate)
  end
end
```

Now, we can demonstrate that as long as a banking operation function has returned, customer data is safely written to durable storage and, thanks to our loading prior state at startup, power failures don't threaten our data[^6]:

[^6]: This isn't entirely true. Writing data to durable storage involves asking the operating system to broker our request with the actual, underlying disk drive that will store the data. Here we haven't taken care to ensure that the operating system (or even the Ruby runtime) won't hold our data pending without our knowledge. But for the sake of learning by writing toy software, we'll let a sucessful return from `File#puts` be good enough!

```irb
[output]examples/1-3.rb@1.3
```

## Big Ideas: Layers, Encapsulation, and Dependencies

If we zoom out an look at how our `Bank`, `Buffer`, and `Disk` classes are arranged we could think of them as sitting along a continnum with human users at one end and durable storage media at the other.  The `Bank` class is designed to be used by human actors, as it is the entrypoint in all of our test scripts (`bank = Bank.new`) and has an interface that aligns with how banking professionals will use the software.  At the other end of the spectrum, `Disk` is the computational endpoint for our data -- data goes to live in durable storage that the `Disk` class provides access to. The `Disk` class's interface doesn't necessarily cater to the banking use-cases we're working on. In fact, the `Disk` API is rather ambiguous to any particular domain! It caters to putting data into storage and retriving data from storage.  What kind of data is irrelevant, it's very general purpose.

The arrangement of these classes also vary by technical systems they represent.  `Buffer`, sitting somewhere in-between `Bank` and `Disk`, interacts with volatile computer memory that is cleared and reused when the program exits. `Disk`, on the other hand, interacts with durable storage (like hard drive disks, solid state drives, magnetic tape, etc). `Bank` interacts with the most fleeting and volatile of all the technical systems -- reality! An infinite number of events happen in the real world; `Bank` is designed to capture only those events that banking experts deem necessary for maintaining accounts and balances.

Put together side-by-side, these components interact with each other to form a pathway for banking data to travel. Taking real-life events as codified input, `Bank` hands details off to `Buffer`, which acts as a sort of staging area for the data. It's backed by a technical system that's more reliable than the fleeting passage of events, but vulnerable to power outage -- so it can only be a temporary stop if our goal is durable, persistent, crash-resistant storage. When `Buffer` then passes data along to `Disk` the data reaches it's final destination where it can viably be recorded in a more permanent form that isn't succeptible to power failure.[^7]

[^7]: Admittedly, this pathway is a touch complex at the moment. Why not have `Bank` just call `Disk#load` and `Disk#dump`? Having an intermediate, in-memory staging area to muck with data before it's persisted to disk will become relevant soon, I promise!

Notice that each componenet handling data along the pipeline is oblivious to where the data came from. For example, `Buffer` doesn't contain a single reference to `Bank`.  We could reuse `Buffer` to power another application and it would work just as well -- nothing about `Buffer`'s implemenetation is tied to the banking industry. Much less aware is `Disk` of `Bank` - `Disk` is amenable to any kind of data so long as it's a sequence to bytes. Each of these components only knows about what's "below" it; that is, who it will hand data off to.

Though, we could say that `Bank` depends on both `Buffer` and `Disk` to meet business requirements. Similarly, `Buffer` depends on `Disk` to route data to durable storage. These "higher level" components don't know exactly the details about how the data gets to where it needs to be, but they trust that it will.

These are the fundamental ideas of **layers** in computing: it's the notion that a system is composed of multiple components that each encapsulate a subsytem and are arraged "on top of" each other so that a given layer doesn't know what's above it, but depends on the items below it. 

If you've worked on web applications you've likely seen this in practice. A user interface contains buttons and widgets that interact with a REST API that interacts with a server-side applications that interacts with a database server that interacts with an operating system that interacts with durable storage. The OSI model that's used to describe networked communication is also a prime example of layers in computing. When you send a GET request over the network there are a number of layers which break you message down into formats that different subsystems (like wifi and ethernet, all the way down to electrical pulses over a copper wire) can understand.

When you're designing a software system layers can be a powerful tool to model how information will travel through the application and how components of the application will interact with each other.  Thinking in layers can also help you determine a component's interface -- exactly what does a "higher level" layer need in order to interact with this component? In our banking application, layers aligned with types of memory help will help us meet required use-cases and (eventually) performance needs.

## One last requirement

What's left is to implement `Bank#transfer`. This will be straightforward but will introduce an critical bug that we'll spend the next post adressing!

From an implementation perspective, transferring funds is as simple as withdrawing money from one account and depositing it in another:

```ruby
# ...

class Bank

  # ...

  def transfer(src_account_name, dest_account_name, amount)
    deposit(src_account_name, amount)
    withdraw(dest_account_name, -amount)
  end

  # ...

end
```

This leaves a big vulnerability open! What if the power fails at a very unfortunate moment -- after withdrawing money from the source account but before depositing money in the destination account? To simulate this, we can add a premature `return` in `Bank#transfer`:

```ruby
# ...

class Bank

  # ...

  def transfer(src_account_name, dest_account_name, amount)
    deposit(src_account_name, amount)
    return # POWER FAILURE!
    withdraw(dest_account_name, -amount)
  end

  # ...

end
```

If power fails in the middle of a compound operation like `#transfer` the bank will end up losing track of the transfered amount:

```irb
[output]examples/1-5.rb@1.5
```

Classic whack-a-mole! By solving one problem, in introduce another! What we need to do is to have `#transfer` behave like a simple operation like `#withdraw` or `#deposit` -- either completely suceeding or completely failing.  In other words, it needs to be *atomic*. 

In the next post we'll look at how database systems address this type of failure by implementing part of the AIRES algorithm.
